Paper: SciPy Proceedings: An Exemplar for Publishing Computational Open Science (#1110)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/scipy_proceedings/main.md

---
title: 'SciPy Proceedings: An Exemplar for Publishing Computational Open Science'
abstract: |

>   The SciPy Proceedings have long served as a cornerstone of scholarly communication within the scientific Python ecosystem. In 2024, the publication process underwent a significant transformation, adopting a new open-source infrastructure built on MyST Markdown and Curvenote. This transition enabled a web-first, interactive publishing workflow that improves reproducibility, readability, and metadata quality. Authors now submit articles through GitHub, receive structured feedback via continuous integration (CI), and benefit from live previews, automated PDF generation with Typst, and archival JATS XML export. This paper details the infrastructure, authoring workflow, and technical tooling that powers the new SciPy Proceedings. We demonstrate how these advances support executable content, interactive figures, and modern metadata standards—offering a model for computational publishing in other scientific communities.

Reviewer: Is there a stronger way to make the point about how essential the scipy proceedings are?  The author says 350 papers in 17 years, which is about 20 a year.  Given how broad SciPy is, this does not appear to be impressive at first glance.  Can other sorts of documents be included in the total, or could focusing on the number of documents in just the last few years be more impressive?

Reviewer: I suggest making the  hyperlinks open into their own web page, as clicking on them takes the reader out of the documentt.

Reviewer: Can the author say more about curvenote to justify its selection or speak to its accessibility.  All the other tools needed to create a document for SciPy proceedings are free and opensource, as is much of the SciPy ecosystem.  However Curvenote appears closed and requires a license to use.  Can the author address how this would not be burdensome for others who wish to contribute to scipy proceedings?

Reviewer 2: We've updated the language around the 350 papers to suggest the number is not necessarily impressive on its own, but given that these papers may have otherwise not had a platform to be published, their contribution is impressive.

We've added some additional discussion around Curvenote, clarifying what aspects are open source, why Curvenote was selected, and how others may be able to contribute.

>   The SciPy Proceedings have long served as a cornerstone of scholarly communication within the scientific Python ecosystem. In 2024, the publication process underwent a significant transformation, adopting a new open-source infrastructure built on MyST Markdown and Curvenote. This transition enabled a web-first, interactive publishing workflow that improves reproducibility, readability, and metadata quality. Authors now submit articles through GitHub, receive structured feedback via continuous integration (CI), and benefit from live previews, automated PDF generation with Typst, and archival JATS XML export. This paper details the infrastructure, authoring workflow, and technical tooling that powers the new SciPy Proceedings. We demonstrate how these advances support executable content, interactive figures, and modern metadata standards—offering a model for computational publishing in other scientific communities.

Reviewer 3: Please provide a date (for `have long served`) or a proper citation for this reference.

Author: We have removed this language and improved the content around here!

>   The SciPy Proceedings have long served as a cornerstone of scholarly communication within the scientific Python ecosystem. In 2024, the publication process underwent a significant transformation, adopting a new open-source infrastructure built on MyST Markdown and Curvenote. This transition enabled a web-first, interactive publishing workflow that improves reproducibility, readability, and metadata quality. Authors now submit articles through GitHub, receive structured feedback via continuous integration (CI), and benefit from live previews, automated PDF generation with Typst, and archival JATS XML export. This paper details the infrastructure, authoring workflow, and technical tooling that powers the new SciPy Proceedings. We demonstrate how these advances support executable content, interactive figures, and modern metadata standards—offering a model for computational publishing in other scientific communities.

Reviewer 4: Recommend providing the JATS abbreviation here.

Author: This has been fixed!

---

# Introduction

> Since its inception, the SciPy Proceedings have offered a high-quality venue for publishing scientific and technical contributions built on the Python ecosystem. With over 350 peer-reviewed articles published over 17 years, the proceedings have become an essential resource for the community. Yet, the traditional PDF-based publishing model—common across many academic fields—has remained largely unchanged, limiting interactivity, reproducibility and discoverability.

Reviewer 3: Does this value apply only to accepted papers? If so, could you also provide the total number of submissions and the acceptance rate?

Reviewer 2: We clarified that these papers come from authors who already have accepted talks. This means the papers are invited, and at that point all papers are accepted, as long as the author puts in the work. The acceptance rate would come from submitted vs. accepted talks (which we do not have).

> In 2024, the SciPy Proceedings committee reimagined the entire publishing workflow by adopting modern, open-source community-built infrastructure built on[ ](https://mystmd.org)[MyST Markdown](https://mystmd.org) and[ ](https://curvenote.com)[Curvenote](https://curvenote.com). This enabled the SciPy Proceedings to be part of a larger movement and ecosystem of open source publishing tools and workflows. The result was a new model of computational publishing that supports executable content, high-quality structured metadata, and a web-first reading experience with interactive features. This shift not only enhances the publishing experience for authors and reviewers but also significantly improves the way readers interact with scientific content.

Reviewer 3: Please remove the space inside the square brackets ([]) and ensure there is a space before the citation to avoid malformed citation links (i.e., on[ ]).

Author: These have been fixed!

> In 2024, the SciPy Proceedings committee reimagined the entire publishing workflow by adopting modern, open-source community-built infrastructure built on[ ](https://mystmd.org)[MyST Markdown](https://mystmd.org) and[ ](https://curvenote.com)[Curvenote](https://curvenote.com). This enabled the SciPy Proceedings to be part of a larger movement and ecosystem of open source publishing tools and workflows. The result was a new model of computational publishing that supports executable content, high-quality structured metadata, and a web-first reading experience with interactive features. This shift not only enhances the publishing experience for authors and reviewers but also significantly improves the way readers interact with scientific content.

Reviewer 3: Please remove the space inside the square brackets ([]) and ensure there is a space before the citation to avoid malformed citation links (i.e., and[ ]).

Author: This has been fixed!

# Interactive Reading & Publishing Experience

> The most noticeable improvement in the 2024 Proceedings is the transition from static PDFs to web-native articles rendered directly from MyST Markdown. Each article is hosted as an interactive web page, preserving semantic structure and supporting accessibility, deep linking, and citation preview.

Reviewer: Suggest saying who is hosting articles or where they are hosted.

> The most noticeable improvement in the 2024 Proceedings is the transition from static PDFs to web-native articles rendered directly from MyST Markdown. Each article is hosted as an interactive web page, preserving semantic structure and supporting accessibility, deep linking, and citation preview.

Reviewer 3: Please provide more details and appropriate citations for the providers of the hosting infrastructure and the name.

Author: We have added more examples and videos of interactive previews. We have also given more details on the hosting infrastructure including licenses and alternatives.

Articles can include:

> - Executed **Jupyter Notebooks** with full output.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   - The Notebooks are popular among the Data Science community, in Academia and also in Industry. The Jupyter Notebooks started as a tool for POCs, or running code once, that eventually was adopted by the cloud computing companies to run in production, and also modern IDEs like VSCode offer Jupyter Notebooks. Gen AI tools can also be directly used in these IDEs, on Jupyter Notebooks.

   - Science asks for reproducible results. Incorporated Jupyter Notebooks offer a display of reproducible results in Python (Julia and R).
```

> - Executed **Jupyter Notebooks** with full output.

Reviewer 3: Please provide more details for the `full output`.

Reviewer 2: We have expanded on jupyter notebooks and how they are included in a paper.

- **3D interactive visualizations** using tools like k3d, pythreejs, or vtk.js.
- Embedded figures, equations, and citations.
- Linkable sections, figures, and code blocks.

> This structure enhances readability and facilitates reuse. Readers can link directly to sections or figures, view outputs in-line, and copy or preview code embedded from GitHub repositories. Unlike previous workflows, the articles are rendered using the same MyST engine throughout authoring, preview, and publication—what authors see locally is exactly what readers experience on the web.

Reviewer: Suggest talking about the principle of sharing scientific research - fundamentally when writing papers, the reader should be presented with the data and techniques used to replicate the study - reproducibility is one of the cornerstones of scientific research.  The author discusses features that support this concept without saying how those features are necessary in today's world.

Reviewer 2: We've expanded our introduction to hopefully motivate reproducibility in scientific publishing.

> :::{figure #listing} https://lh7-rt.googleusercontent.com/docsz/AD_4nXfiL0EM5HyvulsbxndhDr5lNF3ccv6B4TDACudp6121gPLf17FbpGDwqNmudrOF0OKRUQiI_ZfJc5FS7nAZY0UYCZh68uyFCGf9cX3GMeRUCkDoxQCe93M3CEYbEJCCWW7DapcA7w?key=vSig9yoi3-QTUzhbwsUJyw

Reviewer 3: Please increase the size of the figure to improve legibility.

Author: All content has been brought inline.

> Side-by-side comparison of a 2023 Proceedings listing page and the 2024 listing in the new format. All previous years have been transferred to the new format, and the 2023 have been converted to full text as well; previous years have not yet been fully converted and only show abstracts.

Reviewer: Consider a discussion on the ongoing conversion process.  Is there a schedule?  Are resources required?  Are volunteers being solicited?  The graphic could be improved if instead of showing listings of articles on the left side and a new formatted article on the right, if the left side could show a static PDF or the before and after of the same article that is shown on the right.

Reviewer 2: We removed the off-hand sentence about conversion. This process is not relevant to the points in this paper. We've also updated this figure caption to try to clarify why the comparison in the figure is relevant and worth maintaining in the paper.

:::

:::{figure #web-rendering} https://lh7-rt.googleusercontent.com/docsz/AD_4nXdCBI5bg362tMHeJqmnaGVA65ShiYWLQIuTRXdCM7zfXEsVV6TjF6mDHiBzCkyIlTkzVjz_9I1bNwcUW57qOHaR_5RFAFsqjbBqAyi6QAl0GI4pj8U2X7KGyhEYUBBJtoL-j8y7aw?key=vSig9yoi3-QTUzhbwsUJyw

We have focused on web-native rendering, hover previews and including interactive figures.
:::

# Authoring & Submission Workflow

Authors submit their articles using a standardized MyST template scaffolded by the mystmd CLI. Each submission consists of:

> - A myst.yml file capturing authorship, affiliations, ORCIDs, RORs, keywords, and licensing.

Reviewer: It is generally good practice to spell out the first use of acronyms

Author: All abbreviations have been spelled out and added to the hover/accessibility list.

- Markdown or Jupyter Notebook source files using MyST syntax.
- Static assets such as figures, datasets.

> After previewing the article locally with myst start, authors open a Pull Request on GitHub. This submission triggers a **GitHub Actions CI pipeline** that performs:

Reviewer: Should the author start with Github and setup an environment there?  Can links to templates or starter files be shared for prospective future authors?

Reviewer 2: We expanded slightly on how to get started, including a link to the SciPy proceedings article template.

- **Metadata schema validation** (e.g., required ORCID, DOIs for references).
- Rendering to HTML for preview.
- PDF generation via Typst.
- JATS XML export for archival.

Authors use the CI feedback to identify and resolve issues, such as missing identifiers, improper headings, or unreferenced figures. This structured feedback improves metadata quality and consistency across the proceedings—analogous to "linting" in software development.

:::{figure #pull-request} https://lh7-rt.googleusercontent.com/docsz/AD_4nXcg7QwsU0j_gXffNQ7QDXQv_lx-gQeOIqiEIuyDTTMIdPInsKNMbflnnzS5slqltjy6f2BdesOBHR3i9ehXWzc1E1U9TdkQkx7DN3c3xR4zcN_4irLZxOJTOj3zYrkgSOIOC9-04Q?key=vSig9yoi3-QTUzhbwsUJyw

Screenshot of a GitHub Pull Request showing CI failure due to missing ORCID metadata, with the corrected version in a follow-up commit ([Cervantes-Sanchez, 2025](https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/1090))
:::

As with previous years, open peer review occurs directly within GitHub, with reviewers leaving line-level comments and discussing changes collaboratively. Once accepted, the article is merged and included in the final build.

# Build System and Infrastructure

> The SciPy Proceedings infrastructure is built on GitHub Actions and the Curvenote CLI. Each submission is automatically validated and rendered across several formats using a reproducible build pipeline:

Reviewer: Recommend the author describe what validating a journal paper means.  Is this more of a verification process?

Reviewer 2: We have gone into detail about the point and scope of this validation, including a few examples of what sort of data in the submission gets validated.

- **Web (HTML)**: Rendered using MyST Markdown and published to the Proceedings site.
- **PDF**: Generated using[ ](https://typst.app)[Typst](https://typst.app), replacing LaTeX for greater speed, reliability, and customizability.
- **JATS XML**: Introduced in 2024, this machine-readable format supports long-term preservation and interoperability with scholarly indexing systems.
- **Previews**: GitHub Pages hosts live previews per Pull Request, allowing reviewers and authors to inspect the exact output.

:::{figure #pdf-template} https://lh7-rt.googleusercontent.com/docsz/AD_4nXcLNMaAGtbrNFh_8tZTM67NzMKAXP44SxIFeL_GK0w0KlnztfNj4e0L3ptp2EbQX4MFKMUhaLMc-b8oneOb3XMrOQ3eyBOi1ax_zhqzKDgXkvV9ZulZFUDYXkZsM6hhptb2NU9HcQ?key=vSig9yoi3-QTUzhbwsUJyw

> Comparison between 2023 and 2024 PDF templates, 2024 improved the branding and template to be more modern; the template now uses Typst over LaTeX, which also improves the build speed.

Reviewer: Up until this point, there wasn't a discussion about some of the features that were replaced, such as Typst over LaTex.  Such things should be discussed in the body of the paper rather than only be encountered in a figure caption.

Reviewer 2: We've added a section on typst vs. latex specifically.

:::

> The transition to Typst allowed us to build a fully customized SciPy Proceedings PDF template, ensuring consistency with the new web style while supporting traditional academic formatting and citation standards.

Reviewer: Can the author say why this couldn't be done before?

Reviewer 2: The section on typst now gives better motivation for what benefits this new PDF build system brings.

# Metadata, Reuse, and Interoperability

The move to structured MyST Markdown and schema-validated metadata unlocks new possibilities for reuse, attribution, and discoverability. Metadata is required at the submission stage and validated throughout the review process, including:

- Author names and ORCIDs
- Institutional affiliations (ROR)
- Keywords, license, and abstract
- DOI for associated datasets or software

Each component of an article (e.g., figures, equations, or code blocks) is preserved in a structured way, improving reusability. For example, figures can be referenced externally, cited independently, or embedded into institutional repositories without modification.

JATS XML export supports interoperability with discovery engines and indexing services, while also laying the foundation for cross-journal content federation and machine-readable citation networks.

> # Broader Implications and Future Work

Reviewer 3: Before the # Broader Implications and Future Work section, could you add a section outlining the main modifications made in response to reviewers’ and editors’ comments?

Author: We have responded to all reviewers comments now, thanks for the feedback!

The 2024 SciPy Proceedings represent a working example of open, executable scientific publishing. Unlike most journals, this infrastructure is entirely built on open tools:

- **MyST Markdown**: An open standard with community-led development.

> - **Curvenote**: Open-source tooling for authoring and submission.

Reviewer: Is curvenote really open-source or freely available for anyone to use?  The link to curvenote at the beginning of the article brings the reader to a page that suggests it is not.

Reviewer 2: The authoring/submission tooling is open source. The web platform is not. I've updated the language to make this more clear.

- **Typst**: A modern, open-source typesetting engine.
- **GitHub Actions**: Transparent, reproducible CI workflows.

> Looking ahead we plan to improve the Jupyter-based live execution support in future years and integration with computational notebooks.

Reviewer: Consider removing the leading words "looking ahead" as it is redundant with the later phrases of "in future years"

Reviewer 4: I agree.

# Conclusion

The SciPy Proceedings have embraced a new model for computational publishing—one that is open-source, interactive, and built for reproducibility. By combining MyST Markdown, Curvenote, GitHub-native workflows, and Typst, we provide authors and readers with a more dynamic, structured, and trustworthy experience. This infrastructure is not specific to SciPy. It offers a replicable model for other conferences, journals, and scientific communities seeking to modernize how research is written, reviewed, and shared.

> 

Reviewer 5: >>This infrastructure is not specific to SciPy.

This is important. Also it may be useful to include if CurveNote can support other cloud platforms like BitBucket and GitLab - although they are not as popular as GitHub. Especially if CurveNote supports these platforms, or can easily enough adapt to these platforms, that should be included.

Author: We have linked to other deployment instructions with MyST (https://mystmd.org/guide/deployment), which Curvenote includes, to deploy to many of these other places.

# Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of Chris Calloway, Meghann Agarwal, Stefan van der Walt, and Jim Weis for their support, coordination, and feedback throughout the transition to the new SciPy Proceedings infrastructure. Their efforts were instrumental in shaping the submission process, reviewing tooling, and ensuring a smooth experience for authors and reviewers alike.

> We thank the current SciPy 2024 Proceedings Committee — Amey Ambade, Ana Comesana, Sean Freeman, Sanhita Joshi, Charles Lindsey, and Hongsup Shin — for their dedication and hard work in supporting authors, managing reviews, and ensuring the quality and integrity of this year’s volume.

Reviewer 5: 2025

> We thank the current SciPy 2024 Proceedings Committee — Amey Ambade, Ana Comesana, Sean Freeman, Sanhita Joshi, Charles Lindsey, and Hongsup Shin — for their dedication and hard work in supporting authors, managing reviews, and ensuring the quality and integrity of this year’s volume.

Reviewer 3: SciPy 2025?

> We also thank the many members of past SciPy Proceedings committees and infrastructure teams whose work laid the foundation for this transformation. The continuity, care, and community leadership built over the last 17 years have made this evolution possible.

Reviewer 5: Some generic feedback after the talk -

1. MyST - Sphinx comparison will be useful, for the unitiated.
2. Other places where Curvenote is used - the ease of use; for example it getting used for a school
3. Near future development - PDF is stable what about MyST, Python documentation, etc

Reviewer 3: The reference file (mybib.bib) is not properly linked or integrated into the manuscript. Please ensure that citations are correctly formatted and that the bibliography is rendered appropriately. [View file](https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/1110/files#diff-4fe6c9839e9a6f351ea2b2d22808c2d2cdc38c191a82e911762f0231d9a7f0f8)

Author: We have removed the bib files and link directly to the DOIs in all cases now.

> We also thank the many members of past SciPy Proceedings committees and infrastructure teams whose work laid the foundation for this transformation. The continuity, care, and community leadership built over the last 17 years have made this evolution possible.

Reviewer 4: All in all, well-produced and lucid. Highly recommend some expansion on the 'Broader Implications and Future Work' section considering the continuing work with SciPy. LGTM.

Author: Thanks @ameyxd -- we have reworked some of the sections and brought the implications into each section individually rather than calling it out on its own section. We have also updated the conclusion to highlight some of this.

## Creating a Discoverable Network of Science

As more conferences and journals adopt this publishing model, they create an interconnected network of scientific knowledge that is browsable and discoverable like a wiki. Each article becomes a node in this network, with rich metadata, cross-references, and executable content that can be linked, cited, and built upon. This network effect amplifies the impact of individual contributions and enables researchers to navigate between related work across different communities and disciplines.

The structured metadata and semantic markup make this network machine-readable, allowing for intelligent discovery, recommendation systems, and automated synthesis of research findings. As the network grows, it becomes increasingly valuable for researchers seeking to understand connections between different areas of computational science and identify opportunities for collaboration and innovation.

## Demonstrating Accessibility

> The accessibility of this publishing model is perhaps best demonstrated by [Morganton Scientific](https://morgantonscientific.org), a high school science journal that publishes using the same infrastructure as the SciPy Proceedings. The fact that high school students can successfully publish scientific content using the same tools and workflows as professional researchers demonstrates how intuitive and accessible this approach is. This accessibility is crucial for democratizing scientific publishing and ensuring that valuable contributions from diverse communities can be shared and recognized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The accessibility of this publishing model is perhaps best demonstrated by [Morganton Scientific](https://morgantonscientific.ncssm.edu/), a high school science journal that publishes using the same infrastructure as the SciPy Proceedings. The fact that high school students can successfully publish scientific content using the same tools and workflows as professional researchers demonstrates how intuitive and accessible this approach is. This accessibility is crucial for democratizing scientific publishing and ensuring that valuable contributions from diverse communities can be shared and recognized.
```
